---
layout: post
title: WIP
categories:
  - category1
  - category2
date: 2016-04-06 13:46:59
tags:
authorId: kyle_baley
---

Someone on Western Devs posted [an article](http://thecodist.com/article/my-biggest-regret-as-a-programmer) on someone's regrets as a programmer. I fundamentally disagree with the sentiment of this article and the remainder of this post will be eight paragraphs belabouring this point.

In the article, the author describes their [Mr. Destiny](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100201/) moment where they with they had gone into management rather than sticking with being "just" a programmer. Thus perpetuating the myth in our industry that you aren't worth anything unless you *Change The World™*.

To be fair, the author is careful not to be prescriptive. It's very much "these are my regrets and thoughts" and not "you should do this in the same situation". I'm thankful for that and I'll pay the same courtesy. These are my thoughts as they apply to me personally. If you can relate to it in any way, that's not my fault.

Twenty years ago, I suppose I was at my own crossroads though I didn't really recognize it as such until I thought about it just now. Ever since I was in grade 8, I was going to be an actuary. At the time, I was told "you have to be good at math and you'll make a lot of money". What else do you need to hear when you're in grade 8?

So I set about my goal and got a degree, a Bachelor of Commerce I believe. I wasn't really sure what to make of the Faculty of Management, what with their wine and cheeses and people coming to class in suits and "networking" but whatever, I did the work, finished my studies, and started interviewing like you were supposed to.

At some point in that first six months of interviewing, I clued in to something: programming, which I had been doing for about 10 years by that point as a hobby, was a career choice! Was it a lucrative one? Was it better than being an actuary? Who cares, it was fun and people got paid to do it! So I went back to school. That is, to my ageing memory, the sum total of the thought I put into it. (This will be a recurring theme throughout this post.)

So I did it. I went back to school, got yet another degree, and started working. My first job was in the corporate world, an oil and gas company. My next, with a startup where I [interviewed badly](http://kyle.baley.org/2008/01/interview-question-tell-me-about-your-mother/) and they hired me anyway. The third was with a consulting company. Since then: contracting, my own startup, and employeehood in some order. Along the way, I've learned, to varying degrees, VB6, classic ASP, .NET, RPG, Livelink, Sharepoint, JavaScript, Ruby, Java, SQL Server, Azure, Google Web Toolkit, and more acronymed software methodologies and techniques than I care to admit. I've blogged, co-written a book, spoken at conferences, and created a user group.

While you're free to copy and paste all this into my obituary, there's a reason I list it out. I have never put much thought into my career and I don't have any intrinsic itch I've been meaning to scratch. How did I choose when and where to do all of these things? The opportunities came up and I said yes. Again, not much more thought goes into it than that.

I have no regrets. Certainly not on a macro level. Should I have pursued a career as an actuary which, in all likelihood, would have ended up more lucrative financially? Was it a waste of time learning Livelink? Should I have gone into a managerial role?

Does it matter?



Granted, I have the power to see things through a pair of glasses a supernatural shade of rose. 

Consider the language from the post I mentioned earlier:

> I can only imagine how in demand I could have been.
> 
> My sister has 10X the assets I have.

And my favourite one: 

> And today I am still just a programmer. Who’s the weenie now?

Today, eighteen years into my own career, I'm also "just" a programmer. 